---
layout: post
title: Converting Decimal Integers to Binary
subtitle: testing
---

**The algorithm:**

Divide your decimal integer - for example, 5 - by two.

`5 / 2 = 2, remainder 1`

The remainder is the LAST digit of the binary conversion.

Divide the result - in this case, 2 - by two.

`2 / 2 = 1, remainder 0`

The remainder, this time, is the SECOND-TO-LAST digit of the binary conversion.

Once again, divide the result by two.

`1 / 2 = 0, remainder 1`

Now that we have hit zero, further divisions by two are pointless. 1 is the FIRST digit of the binary conversion.

5, therefore, converts to 101.

**But why?**

The first thing to understand is that each digit of a binary number represents a power of 2. For example, 101, from RIGHT TO LEFT, means:

```
1 * 2 ^ 0
0 * 2 ^ 1
1 * 2 ^ 2
```

Giving a total of 5.

So you can have one 1, or no 1s. And one 2, or no 2s. And so on.

With this knowledge, you can begin to build your binary number, starting with the last digit. Will there be a shortfall of 1 after the preceding digits - corresponding to 2, 4, 8 and so on - have been counted?

Mod the number by 2.

`5 % 2 = 1`

This is the last digit of the binary number. Subtract it from the decimal number and add it to the binary one.

What about the second-to-last digit? Will there be a shortfall of 2 after the preceding digits have been counted?

You COULD mod the number by 4.

`4 % 4 = 0`

No remainder, so that’s a 0 in the second-to-last position.

OR you could, as in the above algorithm, mod HALF the number by 2, which is equivalent and removes the need for the subtraction step mentioned earlier. Proceeding with the latter approach:

`2 % 2 = 0`

And the third-to-last digit?

`1 % 2 = 1`

That’s a 1 in the position corresponding to 4. Further divisions by 2 are pointless, thus completing the conversion.

**Simple Python example:**

```python
def decimal_to_binary(n: int) -> str:
    if n == 1 or n == 0:
        return str(n)
    quotient, remainder = divmod(n, 2)
    return decimal_to_binary(quotient) + str(remainder)
```
